[draft] TypeScript for Solid (#313)
solidjs/solid-docs-next: content/guides/typescript-for-solid.mdx

This denotes Solid's type `Accessor<T>`, mapping to `() => number | undefined`. 
The `| undefined` is attributed to the lack of efault value in `createSignal`, leading to the signal's initial undefined state.

The signal setter, `setCount`, is of type `Setter<number>`. 
This complex type roughly resembles `(value? : number | ((prev?: number) => number)) => number`, accommodating both a direct number or a function which takes a potential pervious value that results in a number.
Since the signal's start is undefined, both the direct number and the function's number parameter are optional.

Typescript errors can present with parameter assignments, such as `setcount(value)`. 
To make sure `value` isn't mistaken for a function, you can use `setCount(() => value)`. 

#### Default values

Defining default values when invoking `createSignal` can sidestep explicit type specification and removes the potential `| undefined` type:

```typescript
const [count, setCount] = createSignal(0);
const [name, setName] = createSignal("");
```

In this example, TypeScript understands the types as `number` and `string`.

> This means that `count` and `name` directly receive the types `AAccessor<number>` and `Accessor<string>`, respectively, without the `| undefined` tag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that `count` and `name` directly receive the types `Accessor<number>` and `Accessor<string>`, respectively, without the `| undefined` tag.
```

```typescript
const [name, setName] = createSignal<string>();
return <Show when={name()}>Hello {name().replace(/\s+/g, "\xa0")}!</Show>;
```

TypeScript may not like this.
While you can understand that the second call to `name()` happens only if the first is truthy, TypeScript cannot. 
It may flag an error indicating that `name()` could potentially be `undefined` when `.replace()` is called.

There are a few ways to tackle this:

1. **Non-Null Assertion**
Use TypeScript's [non-null assertion operator (!).](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/everyday-types.html#non-null-assertion-operator-postfix-) 
This operator tells TypeScript you're confident the value isn't `null` or `undefined`:

```typescript
return <Show when={name()}>Hello {name()!.replace(/\s+/g, "\xa0")}!</Show>;
```
While this may be a quick option, incorrectly asserting can lead to runtime errors if the value does turn out to be `null` or `undefined`.

2. **Callback form of Show**

Solid offers a callback form for the [`<Show>`](/reference/show) component, where the truthy value of the `when` prop gets passed in:

```typescript
return (

>   <Show when={name()}>{(n) => <>Hello {n.replace(/\s+/g, "\xa0")}!</>}</Show>

Reviewer: Might also be worth showing that an iife can be used to narrow down unions of types:
```ts
const [data, setData] = createSignal<User | Admin>() // T: Signal<User | Admin | undefined>

<Show when={(() => {
  const v = data()
  return v && v.type === "user" && v // T: User | undefined
})()}>
  {user => <User user={user()} />}
</Show>
```

);
```

This method leverages the type information embedded in the [`<Show>`](/reference/show) component.
TypeScript can infer that since `n` comes from a truthy `name()`, it can't be `undefined` or other falsy values.
However, accessing this null asserted form incorrectly may thrown an error if the condition is not satisfied.

## Advanced JSX attributes and directives

### Custom event handlers

For custom events in Solid, the [`on:___`]() and [`oncapture:___`]() attributes can be utilized. 
To type these events, you'll need to extend Solid's JSX namespace.

```typescript
class NameEvent extends CustomEvent {
  type: "Name";
  detail: { name: string };

  constructor(name: string) {
    super("Name", { detail: { name } });
  }
}

declare module "solid-js" {
  namespace JSX {
    interface CustomEvents {
      Name: NameEvent;  // Matches `on:Name`
    }
    interface CustomCaptureEvents {
      Name: NameEvent;  // Matches `oncapture:Name`
    }
  }

> }

Reviewer: You might also include a way to extend custom events to include native html events too. This might be helpful if you want to attach a normal event-listener, instead of relying on event delegation.
By default the native events are not included, so doing `<div on:mousemove={e => {}} />` will result in a typescript error.
They could be easily added by doing:
```ts
declare module "solid-js" {
  namespace JSX {
    interface CustomEvents extends HTMLElementEventMap {}
    interface CustomCaptureEvents extends HTMLElementEventMap {}
  }
}
```
Or to pick only the events we need:
```ts
declare module "solid-js" {
  namespace JSX {
    interface CustomEvents extends Pick<HTMLElementEventMap, "mousemove" | "pointermove"> {}
  }
}
```

Author: Ended up adding this in an aside - thank you!

import { Aside } from "~/components/configurable/Aside";

# TypeScript for Solid

## Overview

[TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/) is a superset of JavaScript that enhances code reliability and predictability through the introduction of [static types](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/everyday-types.html). 
While JavaScript code can be directly used in TypeScript, the added type annotations in TypeScript provide clearer code structure and documentation, making it more accessible for developers.

> Solid's design is naturally aligned with TypeScript.

Author: ima just remove the sentence lol

 might be worthwhile having a page to talk about common gotchas due to TS??

> Solid's design is naturally aligned with TypeScript.

Reviewer 2: Sounds good, though right now I can't think of what that would look like other than type narrowing not working as per normal.

```
or, if using React:

```javascript
/** @jsxImportSource react */
```

Opting for the React JSX pragma means having React and its associated dependencies fully integrated into the project.
Furthermore, it makes sure the project's architecture is primed for React JSX file handling is vital.

## Migrating from JavaScript to TypeScript

Transitioning from JavaScript to TypeScript in a Solid project offers the benefits of static typing. Here are some of the key steps and considerations you should bear in mind during the migration:

1. Install TypeScript into your project.

```bash
npm install --save-dev typescript
```

2. Run `npx tsc --init` to generate a `tsconfig.json` file.

3. Update the contents of your `tsconfig.json` to match Solid's configuration:

```json
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "strict": true,
    "target": "ESNext",
    "module": "ESNext",
    "moduleResolution": "node",
    "allowSyntheticDefaultImports": true,
    "esModuleInterop": true,
    "jsx": "preserve",
    "jsxImportSource": "solid-js",
    "types": ["vite/client"],
    "noEmit": true,
    "isolatedModules": true
  }
}
```

4. Create a TypeScript or `.tsx` file to test the setup.

```typescript

> import { Component } from "solid-js";

Reviewer 2: Not resolved.

    </div>
  );
}

export default MyTsComponent;
```

To use in an existing JavaScript component, import the TypeScript component:

```javascript
import MyTsComponent from "./MyTsComponent";

function MyJsComponent() {
  return (
    <>
      {/* ... */}
      <MyTsComponent />
    </>
  );
}
```

<Aside>
**Note:** If you wish to change the entry point file from `index.jsx` to `index.tsx`, you need to modify the `src` attribute in `<script>` to look like the following:

```htmlembedded
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <!-- ... -->
  </head>
  <body>
    <noscript>You need to enable JavaScript to run this app.</noscript>
    <div id="root"></div>
    <script src="/src/index.tsx" type="module"></script>
  </body>
</html>
```
</Aside>

## API types

Solid is written in TypeScript, meaning everything is typed out of the box.

The [API Documentation](/references) details the types of all the API calls. 
In addition, there are several helpful type definitions to make it easier when you need to specify explicit types.

### Signals

Using `createSignal<T>`, you can define the signal's type as `T`. 

```typescript
const [count, setCount] = createSignal<number>();
```

> Here, `createSignal` has the return type `Signal<number>`, corresponding to the type passed into it.

Reviewer 2: @LadyBluenotes For example, I don't see the suggested changes made here. I see that the conversation was marked as resolved, though, which I don't see on the other changes.

> Here, `createSignal` has the return type `Signal<number>`, corresponding to the type passed into it.

Author: @otonashixav turns out the changes i made weren't saved :))))) I'll edit them now

This resolves to a getter-setter [tuple](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/objects.html#tuple-types), both of which are generically typed:

```typescript
import type { Signal, Accessor, Setter } from "solid-js";
type Signal<T> = [get: Accessor<T>, set: Setter<T>];
```

In this instance, the signal getter, `count`, assumes a type `Accessor<number | undefined>`. 
This denotes Solid's type `Accessor<T>`, mapping to `() => number | undefined`. 

> The `| undefined` is attributed to the lack of efault value in `createSignal`, leading to the signal's initial undefined state.

Author: added

> The signal setter, `setCount`, is of type `Setter<number>`. 

Author: added

This complex type roughly resembles `(value? : number | ((prev?: number) => number)) => number`, accommodating both a direct number or a function which takes a potential pervious value that results in a number.
Since the signal's start is undefined, both the direct number and the function's number parameter are optional.

Typescript errors can present with parameter assignments, such as `setcount(value)`. 

> To make sure `value` isn't mistaken for a function, you can use `setCount(() => value)`. 

Reviewer 2: Reading through this again, I don't like my suggested change either, since it doesn't really contextualize when this might happen -- with signals that store functions, and generic signals that could be functions. Without that context this is confusing.

> To make sure `value` isn't mistaken for a function, you can use `setCount(() => value)`. 

Author: How do you suspect addomg that, then?

> Typescript errors can present with parameter assignments, such as `setcount(value)`. 
> To make sure `value` isn't mistaken for a function, you can use `setCount(() => value)`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a signal can hold functions, its setter will not accept functions directly -- the Setter type disallows this -- 
as it has no way of knowing whether such functions should or should not be called to obtain the actual value. 
In such cases, you should always use the setter's callback form: `setSignal(() => value)`. 
```

#### Default values

Defining default values when invoking `createSignal` can sidestep explicit type specification and removes the potential `| undefined` type:

```typescript
const [count, setCount] = createSignal(0);
const [name, setName] = createSignal("");
```

In this example, TypeScript understands the types as `number` and `string`.
This means that `count` and `name` directly receive the types `Accessor<number>` and `Accessor<string>`, respectively, without the `| undefined` tag.

### Context

Just as signals utilize `createSignal<T>`, context uses `createContext<T>`, which is parameterized by the type `T` of the context's value:

```typescript
type Data = { count: number; name: string };
const dataContext = createContext<Data>();
```

> `dataContext` is understood as `Context<Data | undefined>`. 
> Invoking `useContext(dataContext)` mirrors this type, returning `Data | undefined`.
> The `| undefined` arises when context is not defined in the component's ancestors, which leads `useContext` to yield `undefined`.

Author: ```suggestion

Taking into account your feedback, let's simplify and clarify the explanation:
When you invoke `useContext(dataContext)`, it returns the type contained within the context. 
For example, if the context is of type `Context<Data | undefined>`, then using `useContext` with it will naturally yield a result of type `Data | undefined`. 
The `| undefined` part signifies that the context might not be defined in the component's ancestor hierarchy.
```

```typescript
export const makeCountNameContext = (initialCount = 0, initialName = "") => {
  const [count, setCount] = createSignal(initialCount);
  const [name, setName] = createSignal(initialName);
  return [
    { count, name },
    { setCount, setName },
  ] as const;
};

type CountNameContextType = ReturnType<typeof makeCountNameContext>;
export const CountNameContext = createContext<CountNameContextType>();
```

`CountNameContextType` corresponds to the result of `makeCountNameContext`:

```typescript
[
  {readonly count: Accessor<number>, readonly name: Accessor<string>},
  {readonly setCount: Setter<number>, readonly setName: Setter<string>}
]
```

To retrieve the context, using `useCountNameContext` which has aa type signature of `() => CountNameContextType | undefined`.

In scenarios where you may wish to avoid `undefined` as a possible type, you can asser that the context will always be present:

```typescript
export const useCountNameContext = () => useContext(CountNameContext)!;
```

**Note:** A more secure route is to supply a default value to `createContext` to make sure that context is perpetually defined.

### Components

#### The basics

> By default, components in Solid use the generic `Component<P>` type, where `P` represents the prop's type that is typically an object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, components in Solid use the generic `Component<P>` type, where `P` represents the props' type that is an object.
```

I don't think we should imply that `props` could be anything other than a `Record<string, unknown>`.

```typescript

> import type { JSX, Component } from "solid-js";
> 
> type Component<P = {}> = (props: P) => JSX.Element;

Author: ```suggestion
const MyComponent: Component<MyProps> = (props) => {
    ...
}
```

> import type { JSX, Component } from "solid-js";
> 
> type Component<P = {}> = (props: P) => JSX.Element;

Reviewer 2: If the intent is to show usage then `import type { Component } from "solid-js";` should stay. 

```suggestion
import type { Component } from "solid-js";

const MyComponent: Component<MyProps> = (props) => {
    ...
}
```

const Counter: Component = () => {
  const [count, setCount] = createSignal(0);
  return <button onClick={() => setCount((c) => c + 1)}>{count()}</button>;
};
```

Trying to pass unneccessary props or children will result in type errors:

```typescript
<Counter />;  // ✔️
<Counter initial={5} />;  // ❌: No 'initial' prop defined
<Counter>hi</Counter>;  // ❌: Children aren't expected
```

#### Components with props

For components that require the use of props, they can be typed using [generics](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/generics.html#handbook-content):

```typescript
const InitCounter: Component<{ initial: number }> = (props) => {
  const [count, setCount] = createSignal(props.initial);
  return <button onClick={() => setCount((c) => c + 1)}>{count()}</button>;
};

<InitCounter initial={5} />;
```

#### Components with children

Often, components may need to accept child elements.
For this, Solid provides `ParentComponent` that includes `children?` as an optional prop.
If defining a component with the `function` keyword, `ParentProps` can be used as a helper for the props:

```typescript
import { JSX, ParentComponent, ParentProps } from "solid-js";

> type ParentProps<P = {}> = P & { children?: JSX.Element };

Author: Please write this in as a suggestion where you think they make sense.

> import { JSX, ParentComponent, ParentProps } from "solid-js";
> 
> type ParentProps<P = {}> = P & { children?: JSX.Element };

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import { ParentComponent } from "solid-js";
```

const CustomCounter: ParentComponent = (props) => {
  const [count, setCount] = createSignal(0);
  return (
    <button onClick={() => setCount((c) => c + 1)}>
      {count()}
      {props.children}
    </button>
  );
};
```

In this example, `props` is inferred to be of the type `{children?: JSX.Element }`, streamlining the process of defining components that can accept children.

##### Special component types

Solid offers subtypes for components dealing uniquely with children:

* **VoidComponent:** when a component should not accept children.
* **FlowComponent:** designed for components like [`<Show>`](/reference/Show) or [`<For>`](/reference/For), typically requiring children and, occasionally, specific children types.

These types make sure that the children are present and fit the required type, maintaining consistent component behaviour.

> 

Author: could you write these in as a suggestion, please.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

#### Components without the `Component` types

If you do not wish to use the `Component` types, there is no need to. 
Any function which accepts props and returns `JSX.Element` is a valid component. 

```ts
// arrow function
const MyComponent = (props: MyProps): JSX.Element => {
  ...
}

// function declaration
function MyComponent(props: MyProps): JSX.Element {
  ...
}

// component which takes no props
function MyComponent(): JSX.Element {
  ...
}

Additionally, this is the only way to declare generic components:

```ts
function MyGenericComponent<T>(props: MyProps<T>): JSX.Element {
  ...
}

#### Props types

Additionally, the different `Component` types each have a corresponding `Props` type; the type of their props, accepting the same generic types. 

```

> 

Author: this was addressed above

### Event handling

#### Basics

The `JSX.EventHandler<T, E>` type allows you to define event handlers for a specific DOM element type `T` and event type `E.` 

> This provides the event handler function with events of the right type and makes sure it interacts correctly with elements of the expected type.

Reviewer 2: This reads awkwardly to me. I'd like to think that the important thing here is that it is exactly[^1] the type used by the `onInput` property, but that isn't what I get when I read this. 

[^1]: Technically it's `EventHandlerUnion` but no one likes `BoundEventHandler`s.

Author: ```suggestion
The `JSX.EventHandler<T, E>` type allows you to define event handlers for a specific DOM element.
This type ensures event handlers cater to a specific DOM element type `T` and event type `E`.
By providing the event handler function with events of the right type, it ensures that the event handler processes events of the correct type and interacts with elements as anticipated
```

Author: Thoughts?

Reviewer 2: It's better, but it still reads like "this type will fit into the event handler, but something about it is different from the actual type of the event handler that will help me make fewer errors" rather than "this type is the event handler, and I can treat it as such", since the phrasing seems to avoid saying the latter which implies the former. 

I'm not sure if this is intentional to avoid confusion due to the nature of the actual type (which accepts both the event handler and bound event handler), but in that case I would still want to avoid implying that this event handler type is somehow special.

```typescript
import type { JSX } from "solid-js";

// Here's how to define an event handler using the `EventHandler` type:
const onInput: JSX.EventHandler<HTMLInputElement, InputEvent> = (event) => {
    console.log("Input changed to", event.currentTarget.value);
};

// You can then attach this handler to an input element:
<input onInput={onInput} />;
```

#### Inline handlers

> When you define an event handler inline with a JSX attribute, Solid automatically types the handler for you.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you define an event handler inline with a JSX attribute, the handler is automatically typed for you.
```

Typescript does this, not Solid.

Author: added below

This means you get the type inference and checking without any additional work:

```typescript
<input
    onInput={(event) => {
        console.log("Input changed to", event.currentTarget.value);
    }}
/>
```

#### `currentTarget` and `target`

In the context of event delegation, the difference between `currentTarget` and `target` is important:

* `currentTarget`: Represents the DOM element that the event handler is attached to.

> * `target`: Any DOM element within the heirarchy of `currentTarget` that has initiated the event.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `target`: Any DOM element within the hierarchy of `currentTarget` that has initiated the event.
```

Author: added

> While `currentTarget` will always be of type `T` as defined by `JSX.EventHandler<T, E>`, the `target` type can be more general, such as ny DOM element. However, when it comes to specific events such as `Input` and `Focus` events directly attached to input elements, `target` must be typed as `HTMLInputElement`.

Author: added

There are a few ways to tackle this:

1. **Non-Null Assertion**
Use TypeScript's [non-null assertion operator (!).](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/everyday-types.html#non-null-assertion-operator-postfix-) 
This operator tells TypeScript you're confident the value isn't `null` or `undefined`:

```typescript
return <Show when={name()}>Hello {name()!.replace(/\s+/g, "\xa0")}!</Show>;
```
While this may be a quick option, incorrectly asserting can lead to runtime errors if the value does turn out to be `null` or `undefined`.

2. **Callback form of Show**

Solid offers a callback form for the [`<Show>`](/reference/show) component, where the truthy value of the `when` prop gets passed in:

```typescript
const [data, setData] = createSignal<User | Admin>() // T: Signal<User | Admin | undefined>

return(
    <Show when={() => {
      const v = data()
      return v && v.type === "user" && v // T: User | undefined
    })}>
      {user => <User user={user()} />}
    </Show>
  )
```

This method leverages the type information embedded in the [`<Show>`](/reference/show) component.

> TypeScript can infer that since `n` comes from a truthy `name()`, it can't be `undefined` or other falsy values.

Author: ```suggestion
TypeScript can infer that since `v` comes from a truthy `data()`, it can't be `undefined` or other falsy values.
```

> TypeScript can infer that since `n` comes from a truthy `name()`, it can't be `undefined` or other falsy values.

Reviewer 2: I don't know about the choice of words here. I would rather say that
```suggestion
By assigning `v` to a variable, we can utilize type narrowing to narrow the type of `v` before returning it. 
```
I also think this could be in an aside. It really is a shortcut for the (imo) clearer
```ts
const user = createMemo(() => {
  const v = data()
  return v && v.type === "user" && v // T: User | undefined
})
<Show when={user()}>
  {user => <User user={user()} />}
</Show>

To include all native events:

```typescript
declare module "solid-js" {
  namespace JSX {
    interface CustomEvents extends HTMLElementEventMap {}
    interface CustomCaptureEvents extends HTMLElementEventMap {}
  }
}
```

To include specific native events, you can pick certain events (e.g. `mousemove` and `pointermove`):

```typescript
declare module "solid-js" {
  namespace JSX {
    interface CustomEvents extends Pick<HTMLElementEventMap, "mousemove" | "pointermove"> {}
  }
}
```
</Aside>

#### Forcing properties and custom attributes 

Solid's [`prop:___`]() allows forcing properties, while [`attr:___`]() permits custom attributes. 

```typescript
declare module "solid-js" {
  namespace JSX {
    interface ExplicitProperties {
      count: number;
      name: string;
    }
    interface ExplicitAttributes {
      count: number;
      name: string;
    }
  }
}

// Usage
<Input prop:name={name()} prop:count={count()}/>
<my-web-component attr:name={name()} attr:count={count()}/>
```

#### Custom directives

Custom directives can be applied using the [`use:___`]() attribute.

```typescript

> function model(element: HTMLInputElement, value: Accessor<Signal<string>>) {

Reviewer: There is no way to restrict `model` directive to only input elements, so typing the params like this might lead to less issues:
```suggestion
function model(
  element: Element, // directives can be used on any HTML and SVG element
  value: Accessor<Signal<string>> // second param will always be an accessor in case value being reactive
) {
```

  const [field, setField] = value();
  createRenderEffect(() => (element.value = field()));
  element.addEventListener("input", (e) => {
    const value = (e.target as HTMLInputElement).value;
    setField(value);
  });
}

declare module "solid-js" {

>   namespace JSX {

Author: i think this is addressed below starting on line 647?

    interface Directives {
      model: Signal<string>;  // Corresponds to `use:model`
    }
  }
}

// Usage
let [name, setName] = createSignal("");
<input type="text" use:model={[name, setName]} />;
```

##### Addressing import issues with directives

When using directives imported from another file/module, TypeScript may eliminate the import if it mistakenly perceives it as a type. 

* Set the `onlyRemoveTypeImports: true` option in `babel-preset-typescript`. 
If using `vite-plugin-solid`, this can be configured with `solidPlugin({ typescript: { onlyRemoveTypeImports: true } })` in `vite.config.ts`. 
However, this approach mandates judicious use of `export type` and `import type`.

> * Including a statement like `false && d;` in the importing module ensures TypeScript retains the directive's import. 

Reviewer: I'm not sure if anyone will understand what `false && d;` is supposed to mean.
A simple example like this might be clearer:
```tsx
import { directive } from "./directives"

directive // prevents TypeScript's tree-shaking

<div use:directive />
```

// Usage
<div on:Name={(event) => console.log("name is", event.detail.name)} />;
```

<Aside>
**Note**: By default, using native events like `mousemove` with the `on` prefix (e.g., <div on:mousemove={e => {}} />) will result in a TypeScript error. 
This is because they are not included in the custom event typings for Solid.
To solve this, extend the `CustomEvents` and `CustomCaptureEvents` interfaces to include events from the `HTMLElementEventMap`:

To include all native events:

```typescript
declare module "solid-js" {
  namespace JSX {
    interface CustomEvents extends HTMLElementEventMap {}
    interface CustomCaptureEvents extends HTMLElementEventMap {}
  }
}
```

To include specific native events, you can pick certain events (e.g. `mousemove` and `pointermove`):

```typescript
declare module "solid-js" {
  namespace JSX {
    interface CustomEvents extends Pick<HTMLElementEventMap, "mousemove" | "pointermove"> {}
  }
}
```
</Aside>

#### Forcing properties and custom attributes 

Solid's [`prop:___`]() allows forcing properties, while [`attr:___`]() permits custom attributes. 

```typescript
declare module "solid-js" {
  namespace JSX {
    interface ExplicitProperties {

>       count: number;

Author: @otonashixav thoughts on this section now?

return <Show when={name()}>Hello {name().replace(/\s+/g, "\xa0")}!</Show>;
```

TypeScript may not like this.
While you can understand that the second call to `name()` happens only if the first is truthy, TypeScript cannot. 
It may flag an error indicating that `name()` could potentially be `undefined` when `.replace()` is called.

There are a few ways to tackle this:

1. **Non-Null Assertion**
Use TypeScript's [non-null assertion operator (!).](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/everyday-types.html#non-null-assertion-operator-postfix-) 
This operator tells TypeScript you're confident the value isn't `null` or `undefined`:

```typescript
return <Show when={name()}>Hello {name()!.replace(/\s+/g, "\xa0")}!</Show>;
```
While this may be a quick option, incorrectly asserting can lead to runtime errors if the value does turn out to be `null` or `undefined`.

2. **Callback form of Show**

Solid offers a callback form for the [`<Show>`](/reference/show) component, where the truthy value of the `when` prop gets passed in:

```typescript
const [data, setData] = createSignal<User | Admin>() // T: Signal<User | Admin | undefined>

return(

>     <Show when={() => {
>       const v = data()
>       return v && v.type === "user" && v // T: User | undefined
>     })}>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <Show when={() => {
      const v = data()
      return v && v.type === "user" && v // T: User | undefined
    })()}>
```
I'm pretty sure this is what's intended.

      {user => <User user={user()} />}
    </Show>
  )
```

This method leverages the type information embedded in the [`<Show>`](/reference/show) component.
TypeScript can infer that since `n` comes from a truthy `name()`, it can't be `undefined` or other falsy values.

> However, accessing this null asserted form incorrectly may thrown an error if the condition is not satisfied.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, accessing the callback may throw an error if the `when` prop is nullish or false at the time of access. Usually this is not the case, however in `onCleanup` or asynchronous contexts it can be.
```
In general you should never attempt to read signals in `onCleanup` or async, but always store their value, unless you specifically want their latest value; Most of the time in `onCleanup` you want the value when `onCleanup` was called.

import { Aside } from "~/components/configurable/Aside";

# TypeScript for Solid

## Overview

[TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/) is a superset of JavaScript that enhances code reliability and predictability through the introduction of [static types](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/everyday-types.html). 
While JavaScript code can be directly used in TypeScript, the added type annotations in TypeScript provide clearer code structure and documentation, making it more accessible for developers.

By leveraging standard JSX, Solid facilitates seamless TypeScript interpretation. 
Moreover, with Solid's built-in types for the API heighten accuracy. 

> For developers eager to get started, we offer TypeScript templates our [GitHub](https://github.com/solidjs/templates/). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For developers eager to get started, we offer TypeScript templates on [GitHub](https://github.com/solidjs/templates/). 
```

## Configuring TypeScript

When integrating TypeScript with the Solid JSX compiler, there are crucial settings to make for a seamless interaction:

> 1. `"jsx": "preserve"` in the `tsconfig.json` retains the original JSX form.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. `"jsx": "preserve"` in the `tsconfig.json` retains the original JSX form. Solid's JSX transformation is incompatible with TypeScript's JSX transformation.
```
Not sure if this bit of context is important, if you think it isn't feel free to ignore this suggestion.

2. `"jsxImportSource": "solid-js"` designates SolidJS as the source of JSX types.

> 

Reviewer 2: I suggest recommending strict mode be enabled, even if not everyone uses it.

For a basic setup, your `tsconfig.json` should resemble:

```json
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "jsx": "preserve",
    "jsxImportSource": "solid-js"
  }
}
```

For projects with diverse JSX sources, such as a blend of React and Solid, some flexibility does exist. 

> While it's possible to set a default `jsxImportSource` in `tsconfig.json` to corresponds with the majority of your files, TypeScript also allows file-level overrides. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While it's possible to set a default `jsxImportSource` in `tsconfig.json` which corresponds with the majority of your files, TypeScript also allows file-level overrides. 
```

```
or, if using React:

```javascript
/** @jsxImportSource react */
```

Opting for the React JSX pragma means having React and its associated dependencies fully integrated into the project.
Furthermore, it makes sure the project's architecture is primed for React JSX file handling is vital.

## Migrating from JavaScript to TypeScript

Transitioning from JavaScript to TypeScript in a Solid project offers the benefits of static typing. Here are some of the key steps and considerations you should bear in mind during the migration:

1. Install TypeScript into your project.

```bash
npm install --save-dev typescript
```

2. Run `npx tsc --init` to generate a `tsconfig.json` file.

3. Update the contents of your `tsconfig.json` to match Solid's configuration:

```json
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "strict": true,
    "target": "ESNext",
    "module": "ESNext",
    "moduleResolution": "node",
    "allowSyntheticDefaultImports": true,
    "esModuleInterop": true,
    "jsx": "preserve",
    "jsxImportSource": "solid-js",
    "types": ["vite/client"],
    "noEmit": true,
    "isolatedModules": true
  }
}
```

4. Create a TypeScript or `.tsx` file to test the setup.

```typescript

> import { Component } from "solid-js";

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import { type Component } from "solid-js";
```

> function MyTsComponent(): Component {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
function MyTsComponent(): JSX.Element {
```
The `Component` type refers to the function rather than the return type. Alternatively, 
```suggestion
const MyTsComponent: Component = () => {
```
You could also use `VoidComponent` here if you'd like. Personally I prefer not to use it but it's a matter of style.

```tsx
function model(
  element: Element, // directives can be used on any HTML and SVG element
  value: Accessor<Signal<string>> // second param will always be an accessor in case value being reactive
) {
  const [field, setField] = value();
  createRenderEffect(() => (element.value = field()));
  element.addEventListener("input", (e) => {
    const value = (e.target as HTMLInputElement).value;
    setField(value);
  });
}

declare module "solid-js" {
  namespace JSX {
    interface Directives {
      model: Signal<string>;  // Corresponds to `use:model`
    }
  }
}

// Usage
let [name, setName] = createSignal("");
<input type="text" use:model={[name, setName]} />;
```

In using `DirectiveFunctions`, there's the ability to check both arguments (if present) by detailing the entire function type:

```tsx
function model(element: HTMLInputElement, value: Accessor<Signal<string>>) {
  const [field, setField] = value();
  createRenderEffect(() => (element.value = field()));
  element.addEventListener("input", (e) => setField(e.target.value));
}

function log(element: DOMElement) {
  console.log(element);
}

let num = 0;
function count() {
  num++;
}

> function foo(comp: SomeExpectedType, ...args: string[]) {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
function foo(comp: Element, ...args: string[]) {
```

To solve this, extend the `CustomEvents` and `CustomCaptureEvents` interfaces to include events from the `HTMLElementEventMap`:

To include all native events:

```typescript
declare module "solid-js" {
  namespace JSX {
    interface CustomEvents extends HTMLElementEventMap {}
    interface CustomCaptureEvents extends HTMLElementEventMap {}
  }
}
```

To include specific native events, you can pick certain events (e.g. `mousemove` and `pointermove`):

```typescript
declare module "solid-js" {
  namespace JSX {
    interface CustomEvents extends Pick<HTMLElementEventMap, "mousemove" | "pointermove"> {}
  }
}
```
</Aside>

#### Forcing properties and custom attributes 

Solid's [`prop:___`]() allows forcing properties, while [`attr:___`]() permits custom attributes. 

```typescript
declare module "solid-js" {
  namespace JSX {
    interface ExplicitProperties {
      count: number;
      name: string;
    }
    interface ExplicitAttributes {
      count: number;
      name: string;
    }
  }
}

// Usage
<Input prop:name={name()} prop:count={count()}/>
<my-web-component attr:name={name()} attr:count={count()}/>
```

#### Custom directives

> Custom directives can be applied using the [`use:___`]() attribute.

Author: I added this @otonashixav based on a comment you made. Do you think this is an appropriate location for it based on what you were talking about?

In addition, there are several helpful type definitions to make it easier when you need to specify explicit types.

### Signals

Using `createSignal<T>`, you can define the signal's type as `T`. 

```typescript
const [count, setCount] = createSignal<number>();
```

Here, `createSignal` has the return type `Signal<number | undefined>`, corresponding to the type passed into it, and `undefined` as it was uninitialized. 
This resolves to a getter-setter [tuple](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/objects.html#tuple-types), both of which are generically typed:

```typescript
import type { Signal, Accessor, Setter } from "solid-js";
type Signal<T> = [get: Accessor<T>, set: Setter<T>];
```

In this case, the `count` signal getter has the type `Accessor<number | undefined>`. 
In Solid, `Accessor<T>` is equivalent to `() => T`. 
Here, it means `count` is a function that returns either a `number` or `undefined`.

The reason `undefined` is included in the type is because the signal was not initialized. 
Therefore, its initial state can be `undefined`.

The signal setter, `setCount`, is of type `Setter<number | undefined>`. 

> This complex type roughly resembles `(value? : number | ((prev?: number) => number)) => number`, accommodating both a direct number or a function which takes a potential pervious value that results in a number.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This complex type roughly resembles `(value? : number | ((prev: number | undefined) => number | undefined)) => number | undefined`, accommodating both a direct number or a function which takes a potential previous value that results in a number.
```
The function form will always be called with one argument, which you can choose to ignore; it isn't correct to say that parameter is optional.
Also, the return type of the setter will match the type passed to it, behaviour matching a normal assignment. Not sure if that's worth documenting though.

> Since the signal's start is undefined, both the direct number and the function's number parameter are optional.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since the signal contains `undefined`, its setter can be invoked with no parameters to set the signal's value to `undefined`.
```

> ```
> 
> In this case, the `count` signal getter has the type `Accessor<number | undefined>`. 
> In Solid, `Accessor<T>` is equivalent to `() => T`. 
> Here, it means `count` is a function that returns either a `number` or `undefined`.
> 
> The reason `undefined` is included in the type is because the signal was not initialized. 
> Therefore, its initial state can be `undefined`.
> 
> The signal setter, `setCount`, is of type `Setter<number | undefined>`. 
> This complex type roughly resembles `(value? : number | ((prev?: number) => number)) => number`, accommodating both a direct number or a function which takes a potential pervious value that results in a number.
> Since the signal's start is undefined, both the direct number and the function's number parameter are optional.
> 
> When a signal is designed to store functions, its setter function won't directly accept new functions as values.
> This is because the setter can't determine whether the function should be executed to get the actual value. 
> In these situations, you should use the callback form of the setter: `setSignal(() => value)`.

Author: ```suggestion
In Solid, a signal's getter, like `count`, is essentially a function that returns a specific type. 
In this case, the type is `Accessor<number | undefined>`, which translates to a function `() => number | undefined`. 
Including `undefined` in the type indicates that the signal may not have been initialized, so its initial state could be `undefined`.

The corresponding setter, `setCount`, has a more complex type: `Setter<number | undefined>`. 
This type can be roughly understood as a function that takes either a direct number or another function as its argument. 
This function argument, in turn, can take the previous value of the signal and return a new value. 
Both the input and output can be either a number or `undefined`. 
Notably, invoking `setCount` without any parameters will set the signal's value to `undefined`.

When using the function form of the setter, a single argument is provided, which can be ignored if desired.
Additionally, the return type of the setter will align with the type of value passed into it, echoing the behavior expected from a typical assignment operation.

If a signal is intended to store functions, the setter won't directly accept new functions as values. 
This is because it can not distinguish whether the function should be executed to yield the actual value or stored as is. 
In these situations, using the callback form of the setter is recommended: `setSignal(() => value)`.
```

@otonashixav based on what you mentioned above, I rewrote this part. Let me know what you think

Reviewer 2: ```diff
- Including `undefined` in the type indicates that the signal may not have been initialized, so its initial state could be `undefined`.
+ As the signal was not initialized, its initial state is `undefined`, therefore `undefined` is included in its type.
```

Otherwise looks good.

This leverages type inference to determine the type automatically:

```typescript
const [count, setCount] = createSignal(0);
const [name, setName] = createSignal("");
```

In this example, TypeScript understands the types as `number` and `string`.
This means that `count` and `name` directly receive the types `Accessor<number>` and `Accessor<string>`, respectively, without the `| undefined` tag.

### Context

Just as signals utilize `createSignal<T>`, context uses `createContext<T>`, which is parameterized by the type `T` of the context's value:

```tsx
type Data = { count: number; name: string };
```

When you invoke `useContext(dataContext)`, it returns the type contained within the context. 
For example, if the context is of type `Context<Data | undefined>`, then using `useContext` with it will naturally yield a result of type `Data | undefined`. 
The `| undefined` part signifies that the context might not be defined in the component's ancestor hierarchy.
`dataContext` is understood as `Context<Data | undefined>`. 
Invoking `useContext(dataContext)` mirrors this type, returning `Data | undefined`.

> The `| undefined` arises when context is not defined in the component's ancestors, which leads `useContext` to yield `undefined`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `| undefined` arises since it cannot be determined if the context's value will be used in a context where it has been assigned. 
```

> Much like what was seen the [default values](#default-values) in signals, you can avoid the `| undefined` in the type through explicity type definitions to avoid redudancy:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Much like what was seen the [default values](#default-values) in signals, you can avoid the `| undefined` in the type by providing a default value that will be returned if no value was assigned by a context provider.
```

A common approach is forming a factory function to generate a context's value. By using TypeScripts [`ReturnType`](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/everyday-types.html#return-type-annotations), the return type of this function can be used to type this context:

```tsx
export const makeCountNameContext = (initialCount = 0, initialName = "") => {
  const [count, setCount] = createSignal(initialCount);
  const [name, setName] = createSignal(initialName);
  return [
    { count, name },
    { setCount, setName },
  ] as const;
};

type CountNameContextType = ReturnType<typeof makeCountNameContext>;
export const CountNameContext = createContext<CountNameContextType>();
```

`CountNameContextType` corresponds to the result of `makeCountNameContext`:

```tsx
[
  {readonly count: Accessor<number>, readonly name: Accessor<string>},
  {readonly setCount: Setter<number>, readonly setName: Setter<string>}
]
```

To retrieve the context, using `useCountNameContext` which has aa type signature of `() => CountNameContextType | undefined`.

In scenarios where you may wish to avoid `undefined` as a possible type, you can assert that the context will always be present:

```tsx

> export const useCountNameContext = () => useContext(CountNameContext)!;

Reviewer 2: Throwing a readable error may be preferable to non-null asserting. 
```suggestion
export const useCountNameContext = () => {
  const countName = useContext(CountNameContext);
  if (!countName) {
    throw new Error("useCountNameContext should be called inside its ContextProvider");
  }
  return countName;
}
```

```

> **Note:** A more secure route is to supply a default value to `createContext` to make sure that context is perpetually defined.

Reviewer 2: This really depends on what the context is used for. In some cases this might lead to some sort of silent failure which would be less preferable IMO.

      const v = data()
      return v && v.type === "user" && v // T: User | undefined
    })()}>
  )
```

This approach takes advantage of the type information embedded in the [`<Show>`](/reference/show) component. 
By temporarily storing the value `v`, you can use type narrowing to specify its type more accurately before returning it.

You do have to be cautious, however, since accessing the callback may throw an error if the when prop is nullish or false at the time of access. 
This is usually not an issue, but in asynchronous contexts or during [`onCleanup`](/reference/oncleanup), it may occur.

<Aside>
If you find the above method a bit shorthand, there's a more explicit alternative. 
Solid's [`<Show>`](/reference/show) component actually performs memoization, so you don't necessarily need a memo for this:

```tsx
const user = createMemo(() => {
  const v = data()
  return v && v.type === "user" && v // Type: User | undefined
})

<Show when={user()}>
  {user => <User user={user()} />}
</Show>
```
While this approach is more explicit, it's worth noting that the primary example for the callback form should ideally not use this technique for the sake of clarity

> </Aside>

Reviewer 2: I think this section needs a rewrite. I'll do what I can if I have the time.

Author: @otonashixav what makes it need a rewrite?

Reviewer 2: It does a poor job of contextualizing exactly when, and what challenges would be encountered. In other words, it needs to
- Provide an example of why control flow might be problematic in the first place -- usually this would be because a function or component wants a specific type that you want to be able to guarantee, but cannot do so because your values are wrapped in accessors, and won't be narrowed. 
- Show other solutions:
  - Solid wants you to avoid conditional rendering, and prefers if you push it to the leaves, e.g. rewrite your components and functions to accept `undefined` and use either nullish coalescing (`signal() ?? fallback`) or optional chaining (`signal()?.value`).
  - If that isn't possible, or you don't think it's worth the effort, then either `Show` (or `Switch` and `Match`), or other forms of control flow can be used. There are many ways to accomplish this but using the control flow components "properly" will avoid unnecessarily recreating components where possible. 
- Show how `Show` can be used to achieve some semblance of type narrowing in the "official" capacity, i.e. via excluding nullish types, regardless of whether `keyed` is used or not -- `keyed` itself also warrants some explanation since the unkeyed callback form is somewhat restricted in usefulness to typescript.
- Show how the above is insufficient for anything other than removing nullish values -- **the section currently seems to focus solely on this, which is why I believe it should be rewritten.** The `when=IIFE` workaround is not really something I would recommend in an official capacity, so it should be in an aside; I think you misinterpreted my previous comment here. Using a computed signal or memo should be preferred for clarity. The difference between the two can be elaborated elsewhere.

Author: Alright. Rewrite the section when you can. I'm not sure I understaand exactly what you're looking for so I don't feel I can convey what you want.

>     })()}>
>   )
> ```
> 
> Accessing the callback may throw an error if the `when` prop is nullish or false at the time of access.
> Usually this is not the case, however in `onCleanup` or asynchronous contexts it can be.
> 
> TypeScript may not like this.
> While you can understand that the second call to `name()` happens only if the first is truthy, TypeScript cannot. 
> It may flag an error indicating that `name()` could potentially be `undefined` when `.replace()` is called.
> 
> There are a few ways to tackle this:
> 
> 1. **Non-Null Assertion**
> Use TypeScript's [non-null assertion operator (!).](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/everyday-types.html#non-null-assertion-operator-postfix-) 
> This operator tells TypeScript you're confident the value isn't `null` or `undefined`:
> 
> ```typescript
> return <Show when={name()}>Hello {name()!.replace(/\s+/g, "\xa0")}!</Show>;
> ```
> While this may be a quick option, incorrectly asserting can lead to runtime errors if the value does turn out to be `null` or `undefined`.
> 
> 2. **Callback form of Show**
> 
> Solid provides a callback form for its [`<Show>`](/reference/show) component. 
> In this form, the value that makes the when prop true is passed into the component:
> 
> ```typescript
> const [data, setData] = createSignal<User | Admin>() // T: Signal<User | Admin | undefined>
> 
> return(
>     <Show when={(() => {
>       const v = data()
>       return v && v.type === "user" && v // T: User | undefined
>     })()}>
>   )
> ```
> 
> This approach takes advantage of the type information embedded in the [`<Show>`](/reference/show) component. 
> By temporarily storing the value `v`, you can use type narrowing to specify its type more accurately before returning it.
> 
> You do have to be cautious, however, since accessing the callback may throw an error if the when prop is nullish or false at the time of access. 
> This is usually not an issue, but in asynchronous contexts or during [`onCleanup`](/reference/oncleanup), it may occur.
> 
> <Aside>
> If you find the above method a bit shorthand, there's a more explicit alternative. 
> Solid's [`<Show>`](/reference/show) component actually performs memoization, so you don't necessarily need a memo for this:
> 
> ```tsx
> const user = createMemo(() => {
>   const v = data()
>   return v && v.type === "user" && v // Type: User | undefined
> })
> 
> <Show when={user()}>
>   {user => <User user={user()} />}
> </Show>
> ```
> While this approach is more explicit, it's worth noting that the primary example for the callback form should ideally not use this technique for the sake of clarity
> </Aside>

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure how to get the code blocks to close properly.

```suggestion
## Control flow based narrowing

Control flow based narrowing refers to narrowing the type of a value via control flow. Consider the following:

```tsx
const user: User | undefined = maybeUser();
return <div>{user && user.name}</div>;
```

In Solid, however, Accessors cannot be narrowed in a similar way.

```tsx
const [user, setUser] = createSignal<User>();
return <div>{user() && user().name}</div>;
//                    ^ Object is possibly 'undefined'.
```

Similarly, with [`<Show>`](/reference/show), 

```tsx
return (
  <div>
    <Show when={user()}>
      {user().name /* Object is possibly 'undefined' */}
    </Show>
  </div>
);
```

In this case, using optional chaining is a good solution.

```tsx
return <div>{user()?.name}</div>;
```

And with `<Show>`,

```tsx
return (
  <div>
    <Show when={user()}>
      {nonNullishUser => nonNullishUser().name}
    </Show>
  </div>
);
```

This is similar to using the keyed option, except it provides an accessor instead so that
the children are not recreated whenever `when` changes. 

```tsx
return (
  <div>
    <Show keyed when={user()}>
      {nonNullishUser => nonNullishUser.name}
    </Show>
  </div>
);
```

Sometimes, this may not be possible. For instance, with a `UserPanel` component which strictly accepts a `User`:

```tsx
return <UserPanel user={user()} />;
//                        ^ Type 'undefined' is not assignable to type 'User'.
```

Consider refactoring `UserPanel` to accept `undefined`. Doing so would minimize the changes required when a `user` goes from `undefined` to `User`.

Otherwise, using `Show`'s callback form works,

```tsx
return (
  <Show when={user()}>
    {nonNullishUser => <UserPanel user={nonNullishUser()} />
  </Show>
);
```

<Aside>
Casting is also a valid solution, as long as the assumption is valid. For instance,

```tsx
return <div>{user() && (user() as User).name}</div>
```

However, runtime type errors may arise from doing so, notably when passing 
a type-cast value to a component, thereby discarding information that it may be nullish, 
then accessing it asynchronously (e.g. in an event handler or timeout) or in `onCleanup`.
</Aside>

`<Show>` only excludes `null`, `undefined`, and `false` from `when` when using the callback form. If you need to
discriminate a union, consider using a memo or computed signal as a workaround. 

```tsx
type User = Admin | OtherUser;
const admin = createMemo(() => {
  const u = user();
  return u && u.type === "admin" ? u : undefined;
});
return (
  <Show when={admin()}>
    {a => <AdminPanel user={a()} />}
  </Show>
);
```

<Aside>
The following alternative also works when using `Show`:

```tsx
<Show when={(() => {
  const u = user();
  return u && u.type === "admin" ? u : undefined;
})()}>
  {admin => <AdminPanel user={admin()} />}
</Show>
```
</Aside>
```

To include all native events:

```typescript
declare module "solid-js" {
  namespace JSX {
    interface CustomEvents extends HTMLElementEventMap {}
    interface CustomCaptureEvents extends HTMLElementEventMap {}
  }
}
```

To include specific native events, you can pick certain events (e.g. `mousemove` and `pointermove`):

```typescript
declare module "solid-js" {
  namespace JSX {
    interface CustomEvents extends Pick<HTMLElementEventMap, "mousemove" | "pointermove"> {}
  }
}
```
</Aside>

#### Forcing properties and custom attributes 

Solid's [`prop:___`]() allows forcing properties, while [`attr:___`]() permits custom attributes. 

```typescript
declare module "solid-js" {
  namespace JSX {
    interface ExplicitProperties {
      count: number;
      name: string;
    }
    interface ExplicitAttributes {
      count: number;
      name: string;
    }
  }
}

// Usage
<Input prop:name={name()} prop:count={count()}/>
<my-web-component attr:name={name()} attr:count={count()}/>
```

#### Custom directives

Custom directives can be applied using the [`use:___`]() attribute.

> These directives typically accept two arguments: the target element or component, and the value passed to them by the JSX attribute.
> While the conventional `Directives` interface focuses on type-checking the value, which is the second argument, there are additional considerations:
> 
> * A single accessor is always received, limiting the ability to pass in multiple arguments. 
> The closest appropximation is to use syntax such as `<div use:foo={["string", "array"]} />`.
> * The behaviour of TypeScript's type checking for module augmentation allows `DirectiveFunctions` to potentially accept functions that do not strictlly meet the type requirements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These directives typically accept two arguments: the target element, and the value passed to them by the JSX attribute.
The conventional `Directives` interface directly types the types that can be passed to the directive (i.e. the type of `value` in `<div use:foo={value} />`).
The newer `DirectiveFunctions` interface accepts the type of a function instead, from which it will derive the valid types of element(s) and values. 

There are additional considerations:
* A single accessor is always passed to the directive function, so to accept multiple arguments, use `<div use:foo={[a, b]} />`, and accept an accessor to a tuple.
* This applies even when using a boolean directive (`<div use:foo />`, or when passing a static value to a directive (`<div use:foo={false} />`).
* `DirectiveFunctions` can accept functions that do not strictly meet the type requirements, in which case they will be ignored. 
```

  createRenderEffect(() => (element.value = field()));
  element.addEventListener("input", (e) => {
    const value = (e.target as HTMLInputElement).value;
    setField(value);
  });
}

declare module "solid-js" {
  namespace JSX {
    interface Directives {
      model: Signal<string>;  // Corresponds to `use:model`
    }
  }
}

// Usage
let [name, setName] = createSignal("");
<input type="text" use:model={[name, setName]} />;
```

In using `DirectiveFunctions`, there's the ability to check both arguments (if present) by detailing the entire function type

```tsx
function model(element: HTMLInputElement, value: Accessor<Signal<string>>) {
  const [field, setField] = value();
  createRenderEffect(() => (element.value = field()));
  element.addEventListener("input", (e) => setField(e.target.value));
}

function log(element: Element) {
  console.log(element);
}

let num = 0;
function count() {
  num++;
}

function foo(comp: Element, args: Accessor<string[]>) {
  // function body
}

declare module "solid-js" {
  namespace JSX {
    interface DirectiveFunctions {
      model: typeof model;
      log: typeof log;
      count: typeof count;
      foo: typeof foo;
    }
  }
}
```

> Although the `Directives` interface can be employed to restrict the value passed to the directive as a JSX attribute, using `DirectiveFunctions` ensures both the element and value align with the expected types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although the `Directives` interface can be employed to restrict the value passed to the directive as a JSX attribute, using `DirectiveFunctions` ensures both the element and value align with the expected types, as demonstrated below.
```

```tsx
{/* This is correct */}
<input use:model={createSignal('')} />

> {/* These are incorrect */}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{/* These will result in a type error */}
```

    console.log("Input changed to", event.currentTarget.value);
};

// Then attach handler to an input element:
<input onInput={onInput} />;
```

#### Inline handlers

Defining an event handler inline within a JSX attribute automatically provides type inference and checking, eliminating the need for additional typing efforts:

```tsx
<input
    onInput={(event) => {
        console.log("Input changed to", event.currentTarget.value);
    }}
/>
```

#### `currentTarget` and `target`

In the context of event delegation, the difference between `currentTarget` and `target` is important:

* `currentTarget`: Represents the DOM element that the event handler is attached to.
* `target`: Any DOM element within the hierarchy of `currentTarget` that has initiated the event.

In the type signature `JSX.EventHandler<T, E>`, `currentTarget` will consistently have the type `T`. 
However, the type of target could be more generic, potentially any DOM element. 
For specific events like `Input` and `Focus` that are directly associated with input elements, the target will have the type `HTMLInputElement`.

### `ref` attribute

#### Basics

> In an environment without TypeScript, using the `ref` attribute in Solid ensures that the corresponding DOM element is assigned to the variable after it is rendered.:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In an environment without TypeScript, using the `ref` attribute in Solid ensures that the corresponding DOM element is assigned to the variable after it is rendered:
```

```js
let divRef;
console.log(divRef); // Outputs: undefined
onMount(() => {
  console.log(divRef); // Outputs: <div> element
});
return <div ref={divRef} />;
```

In a TypeScript environment, particularly with strict `null` checks enabled, typing these variables can be a challenge.

A safe approach in TypeScript is to acknowledge that `divRef` may initially be `undefined` and to implement checks when accessing it:

```ts
let divRef: HTMLDivElement | undefined;
// This would be flagged as an error during compilation
divRef.focus(); 
onMount(() => {
  if (!divRef) return;
  divRef.focus(); 
});
return <div ref={divRef}>...</div>;
```

> Within the scope of the `onMount` function, which runs after rendering, a non-`null` assertion (indicated by the exclamation mark `!`) can be used:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Within the scope of the `onMount` function, which runs after rendering, you can use a non-`null` assertion (indicated by the exclamation mark `!`):
```

divRef.focus(); 
onMount(() => {
  divRef.focus(); 
});
return <div ref={divRef!}>...</div>;
```

In this case, using `divRef!` within the `ref` attribute signals to TypeScript that `divRef` will receive an assignment after this stage, which is more in line with how Solid works.

<Aside>
  **Caution**: 
  While TypeScript does catch incorrect usage of refs that occur before their JSX block definition, it currently does not identify undefined variables within certain nested functions in Solid. 
  Therefore, additional care is needed when using `ref`s in functions such as [`createMemo`](/reference/createMemo), [`createRenderEffect`](/reference/createRenderEffect), and [`createComputed`](/reference/createComputed).
</Aside>

Finally, a riskier approach involves using the definite assignment assertion right at the point of variable initialization. 
While this method bypasses TypeScript's assignment checks for that particular variable, it offers a quick but less secure workaround that could lead to runtime errors.

```typescript
let divRef!: HTMLDivElement;

// Permitted by TypeScript but will throw an error at runtime:
// divRef.focus();

onMount(() => {
  divRef.focus(); 
});
```

> ## Control flow based narrowing

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Control flow-based narrowing
```

Control flow-based narrowing involves refining the type of a value by using control flow statements.

Consider the following:

```tsx
const user: User | undefined = maybeUser();
return <div>{user && user.name}</div>;
```

> In Solid, however, Accessors cannot be narrowed in a similar way:

Reviewer 3: > Accessors

Are accessors a proper noun or was the capitalization an error? Because you don't capitalize later.

```tsx
const [user, setUser] = createSignal<User>();
return <div>{user() && user().name}</div>;
//                    ^ Object may be 'undefined'.

// Using `<Show>`:

return (
  <div>
    <Show when={user()}>
      {user().name /* Object is possibly 'undefined' */}
    </Show>
  </div>
);

```

In this case, using optional chaining serves as an good alternative:

```tsx
return <div>{user()?.name}</div>;

// Using `<Show>`:

return (
  <div>
    <Show when={user()}>
      {nonNullishUser => nonNullishUser().name}
    </Show>
  </div>
);
```

This approach is simillar using the keyed option, but offers an accessor to prevent the recreation of children each time the `when` value changes.

```tsx
return (
  <div>
    <Show keyed when={user()}>
      {nonNullishUser => nonNullishUser.name}
    </Show>
  </div>
);
```

Note that optional chaining may not always be possible. 
For instance, when a `UserPanel` component exclusively requires a `User` object:

```tsx
return <UserPanel user={user()} />;
//                        ^ Type 'undefined' is not assignable to type 'User'.
```

> If possible, consider refactoring `UserPanel` to accept `undefined`, this minimizes the changes required when `user` goes from `undefined` to `User`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If possible, consider refactoring `UserPanel` to accept `undefined`.
This minimizes the changes required when `user` goes from `undefined` to `User`.
```

  </Show>
);
```

Casting can also be a solution so long as the assumption is valid:

```tsx
return <div>{user() && (user() as User).name}</div>
```

It's worth noting that runtime type errors may arise from doing this. 
This may happen when passing a type-cast value to a component, which discards information that may be nullish followed by accessing it asynchronously, such as in an event handler or timeout, or in `onCleanup`.

`<Show>` only excludes `null`, `undefined`, and `false` from `when` when using the callback form. 
If the types in a union need to be differentiated, a memo or computed signal can work as an alternative solution:

```tsx
type User = Admin | OtherUser;
const admin = createMemo(() => {
  const u = user();
  return u && u.type === "admin" ? u : undefined;
});
return (
  <Show when={admin()}>
    {a => <AdminPanel user={a()} />}
  </Show>
);
```

The following alternative also works when using `Show`:

```tsx
<Show when={(() => {
  const u = user();
  return u && u.type === "admin" ? u : undefined;
})()}>
  {admin => <AdminPanel user={admin()} />}
</Show>
```

## Advanced JSX attributes and directives

### Custom event handlers

> To handle custom events in Solid, the attributes `on:___` and `oncapture:___` can be used. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To handle custom events in Solid, you can use the attributes `on:___` and `oncapture:___`. 
```

Typing these events requires an extension of Solid's JSX namespace.

```tsx
class NameEvent extends CustomEvent {
  type: "Name";
  detail: { name: string };

  constructor(name: string) {
    super("Name", { detail: { name } });
  }
}

declare module "solid-js" {
  namespace JSX {
    interface CustomEvents {
      Name: NameEvent;  // Matches `on:Name`
    }
    interface CustomCaptureEvents {
      Name: NameEvent;  // Matches `oncapture:Name`
    }
  }
}

// Usage
<div on:Name={(event) => console.log("name is", event.detail.name)} />;
```

<Aside>
**Note**: 
By default, using native events like `mousemove` with the `on` prefix — for example, `<div on:mousemove={e => {}} />` —  will trigger a TypeScript error. 
This occurs because these native events are not part of Solid's custom event type definitions.
To solve this, `CustomEvents` and `CustomCaptureEvents` interfaces can be extended to include events from the `HTMLElementEventMap`:

To include all native events:

```ts
declare module "solid-js" {
  namespace JSX {
    interface CustomEvents extends HTMLElementEventMap {}
    interface CustomCaptureEvents extends HTMLElementEventMap {}
  }
}
```

> To include specific native events, certain events can chosen (e.g. `mousemove` and `pointermove`):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To include specific native events, you can choose certain events (e.g. `mousemove` and `pointermove`):
```

```ts
declare module "solid-js" {
  namespace JSX {
    interface CustomEvents extends Pick<HTMLElementEventMap, "mousemove" | "pointermove"> {}
  }
}
```
</Aside>

#### Forcing properties and custom attributes 

In Solid, the [`prop:___`]() directive allows explicit property setting, which is useful for retaining the original data types like objects or arrays.

> [`attr:___`]() directive allows custom attributes, on the other hand, is effective for handling string-based HTML attributes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[`attr:___`]() directive allows custom attributes, on the other hand, and it is effective for handling string-based HTML attributes.
```

```ts
declare module "solid-js" {
  namespace JSX {
    interface ExplicitProperties {
      count: number;
      name: string;
    }
    interface ExplicitAttributes {
      count: number;
      name: string;
    }
  }
}

// Usage
<Input prop:name={name()} prop:count={count()}/>
<my-web-component attr:name={name()} attr:count={count()}/>
```

#### Custom directives

> In Solid, custom directives can be applied using the the `use:___` attribute, which usually accept a target element and a JSX attribute value. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In Solid, custom directives can be applied using the `use:___` attribute, which usually accepts a target element and a JSX attribute value. 
```

The traditional `Directives` interface types these values directly (i.e. the type of `value` in `<div use:foo={value} />`).
However, the newer `DirectiveFunctions` interface takes a function type and derives the valid types for elements and values from it.

There are additional considerations:

> * The directive function always receives a single accessor. For multiple arguments, the syntax `<div use:foo={[a, b]} />` can be used, and an accessor to a tuple should be accepted.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The directive function always receives a single accessor. For multiple arguments, the syntax `<div use:foo={[a, b]} />` is an option, and an accessor to a tuple should be accepted.
```

<input type="text" use:model={[name, setName]} />;
```

In using `DirectiveFunctions`, there's the ability to check both arguments (if present) by detailing the entire function type:

```tsx
function model(element: HTMLInputElement, value: Accessor<Signal<string>>) {
  const [field, setField] = value();
  createRenderEffect(() => (element.value = field()));
  element.addEventListener("input", (e) => setField(e.target.value));
}

function log(element: DOMElement) {
  console.log(element);
}

let num = 0;
function count() {
  num++;
}

> function foo(comp: number, ...args: string[]) {

Reviewer 2: This actually shouldn't work (`comp` can't be a `number`), but it does because of a bug.

}

declare module "solid-js" {
  namespace JSX {
    interface DirectiveFunctions {
      model: typeof model;
      log: typeof log;
      count: typeof count;
      foo: typeof foo;
    }
  }
}
```

> Although the `Directives` interface can be employed to check the value passed as a JSX aattribute, using `DirectiveFunctions` provides enhanced type-checking capabilities, ensuring both the element/component and value align with the exepcted types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although the `Directives` interface can be employed to restrict the value passed to the directive as a JSX attribute, using `DirectiveFunctions` ensures both the element and value align with the expected types.
```
Directives don't work on components.
